README.md, before:

# Let's Encrypt RouterOS / Mikrotik
**Let's Encrypt certificates for RouterOS / Mikrotik**

*UPD 2018-05-27: Works with wildcard Let's Encrypt Domains*

*UPD 2019-07-11: Works with OpenSSH 7+*

*UPD 2021-01-07: Optionally set config file (to support deploying certs to multiple routers)*

[![Mikrotik](https://i.mt.lv/mtv2/logo.svg)](https://mikrotik.com/)


### How it works:
* Dedicated Linux renew and push certificates to RouterOS / Mikrotik
* After CertBot renew your certificates
* The script connects to RouterOS / Mikrotik using RSA Key (without password or user input)
* Delete previous certificate files
* Delete the previous certificate
* Upload two new files: **Certificate** and **Key**
* Import **Certificate** and **Key**
* Change **SSTP Server Settings** to use new certificate
* Change **WWW-SSL Service** to use new certificate
* Change **API-SSL Service** to use new certificate
* Delete certificate and key files from RouterOS / Mikrotik storage

### Installation on Ubuntu 16.04
*Similar way you can use on Debian/CentOS/AMI Linux/Arch/Others*

Download the repo to your system
```sh
sudo -s
cd /opt
git clone https://github.com/danb35/letsencrypt-routeros
```
Make a working copy of the settings file example, then edit the copy:
```sh
cp /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings_example /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings
vim /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings
```
| Variable Name | Value | Description |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| ROUTEROS_USER | admin | user with admin rights to connect to RouterOS |
| ROUTEROS_HOST | 10.0.254.254 | RouterOS\Mikrotik IP or hostname |
| ROUTEROS_SSH_PORT | 22 | RouterOS\Mikrotik SSH port.  Defaults to 22 if not set. |
| ROUTEROS_PRIVATE_KEY | /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa | Private RSA Key to connecto to RouterOS.  Defaults to `/opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa` if not set. |
| DOMAIN | mydomain.com | Use main domain for wildcard certificate or subdomain for subdomain certificate |

Generate RSA Key for RouterOS

*Make sure to leave the passphrase blank (-N "")*

```sh
ssh-keygen -t rsa -f /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa -N ""
```

Send Generated RSA Key to RouterOS / Mikrotik
```sh
source /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings
scp -P $ROUTEROS_SSH_PORT /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa.pub "$ROUTEROS_USER"@"$ROUTEROS_HOST":"id_rsa.pub" 
```

### Setup RouterOS / Mikrotik side
*Check that user is the same as in the settings file letsencrypt-routeros.settings*

*Check Mikrotik ssh port in /ip services ssh*

*Check Mikrotik firewall to accept on SSH port*
```sh
:put "Enable SSH"
/ip service enable ssh

:put "Add to the user RSA Public Key"
/user ssh-keys import user=admin public-key-file=id_rsa.pub
```

### CertBot Let's Encrypt
Install CertBot using official manuals https://certbot.eff.org/#ubuntuxenial-other

*for Ubuntu 16.04*
```sh
apt update
apt install software-properties-common -y
add-apt-repository ppa:certbot/certbot
apt update
apt install certbot -y
```
For other versions or distros, consult the (certbot docs)[https://certbot.eff.org/instructions] for installation instructions.

***In the first time, you will need to create Certificates manually and put domain TXT record***

*follow CertBot instructions*
```sh
source /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings
certbot certonly --preferred-challenges=dns --manual -d $DOMAIN --manual-public-ip-logging-ok
```

### Usage of the script
*To use settings from the settings file:*
```sh
./opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.sh
```

*To specify an alternate settings file:*
```sh
./opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.sh -c /path/to/settings/file
```

*To use script with CertBot hooks for wildcard domain:*
```sh
certbot certonly --preferred-challenges=dns --manual -d *.$DOMAIN --manual-public-ip-logging-ok --post-hook /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.sh --server https://acme-v02.api.letsencrypt.org/directory
```
*To use script with CertBot hooks for subdomain:*
```sh
certbot certonly --preferred-challenges=dns --manual -d $DOMAIN --manual-public-ip-logging-ok --post-hook /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.sh
```

---
### Licence MIT
Copyright 2018 Konstantin Gimpel

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Allow alternate cert/key paths

README.md, after:

# Let's Encrypt RouterOS / Mikrotik
**Let's Encrypt certificates for RouterOS / Mikrotik**

*UPD 2018-05-27: Works with wildcard Let's Encrypt Domains*

*UPD 2019-07-11: Works with OpenSSH 7+*

*UPD 2021-01-07: Optionally set config file (to support deploying certs to multiple routers)*

[![Mikrotik](https://i.mt.lv/mtv2/logo.svg)](https://mikrotik.com/)


### How it works:
* Dedicated Linux renew and push certificates to RouterOS / Mikrotik
* After CertBot renew your certificates
* The script connects to RouterOS / Mikrotik using RSA Key (without password or user input)
* Delete previous certificate files
* Delete the previous certificate
* Upload two new files: **Certificate** and **Key**
* Import **Certificate** and **Key**
* Change **SSTP Server Settings** to use new certificate
* Change **WWW-SSL Service** to use new certificate
* Change **API-SSL Service** to use new certificate
* Delete certificate and key files from RouterOS / Mikrotik storage

### Installation on Ubuntu 16.04
*Similar way you can use on Debian/CentOS/AMI Linux/Arch/Others*

Download the repo to your system
```sh
sudo -s
cd /opt
git clone https://github.com/danb35/letsencrypt-routeros
```
Make a working copy of the settings file example, then edit the copy:
```sh
cp /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings_example /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings
vim /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings
```
| Variable Name | Value | Description |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| ROUTEROS_USER | admin | user with admin rights to connect to RouterOS |
| ROUTEROS_HOST | 10.0.254.254 | RouterOS\Mikrotik IP or hostname |
| ROUTEROS_SSH_PORT | 22 | RouterOS\Mikrotik SSH port.  Defaults to 22 if not set. |
| ROUTEROS_PRIVATE_KEY | /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa | Private RSA Key to connecto to RouterOS.  Defaults to `/opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa` if not set. |
| DOMAIN | mydomain.com | Use main domain for wildcard certificate or subdomain for subdomain certificate |
| CERTIFICATE | | Path to the full certificate chain file.  Defaults to `/etc/letsencrypt/live/"$DOMAIN"/fullchain.pem` if not set. |
| KEY | | Path to the certificate private key file.  Defaults to `/etc/letsencrypt/live/"$DOMAIN"/privkey.pem` if not set. |

Generate RSA Key for RouterOS

*Make sure to leave the passphrase blank (-N "")*

```sh
ssh-keygen -t rsa -f /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa -N ""
```

Send Generated RSA Key to RouterOS / Mikrotik
```sh
source /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.settings
scp -P $ROUTEROS_SSH_PORT /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/id_rsa.pub "$ROUTEROS_USER"@"$ROUTEROS_HOST":"id_rsa.pub" 
```

### Setup RouterOS / Mikrotik side
*Check that user is the same as in the settings file letsencrypt-routeros.settings*

*Check Mikrotik ssh port in /ip services ssh*

*Check Mikrotik firewall to accept on SSH port*
```sh
:put "Enable SSH"
/ip service enable ssh

:put "Add to the user RSA Public Key"
/user ssh-keys import user=admin public-key-file=id_rsa.pub
```

### CertBot Let's Encrypt
Install CertBot using official manuals https://certbot.eff.org/#ubuntuxenial-other

*for Ubuntu 16.04*
```sh
apt update
apt install software-properties-common -y
add-apt-repository ppa:certbot/certbot
apt update
apt install certbot -y
```
For other versions or distros, consult the [certbot docs](https://certbot.eff.org/instructions) for installation instructions.

### Obtain and install the certificate
In the following commands, replace $DOMAIN with the domain name for your device.
`certbot certonly --preferred-challenges=dns --manual -d $DOMAIN --post-hook /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.sh`

To specify an alternate configuration file:
`certbot certonly --preferred-challenges=dns --manual -d $DOMAIN --post-hook "/opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.sh -c /path/to/config/file"`

The commands above will obtain the cert using manual DNS validation, which will require you to manually update your domain's DNS records each time a certificate is requested.  For obvious reasons, this won't renew automatically.  A better solution, if you're using a DNS provider supported by one of [certbot's DNS plugins](https://certbot.eff.org/docs/using.html#dns-plugins), would be to use an appropriate plugin so that certbot can automatically make the appropriate changes.  This will allow for automated renewal.

If your DNS provider isn't supported by one of certbot's plugins, consider using a different client.  acme.sh, for example, has [extensive DNS support](https://github.com/acmesh-official/acme.sh/wiki/dnsapi).  If using an alternate client, consult its documentation for the way to call this script once a cert is issued or renewed (for acme.sh, you'd use `--reloadcmd /opt/letsencrypt-routeros/letsencrypt-routeros.sh`).

If using a client other than certbot, be aware that it may store its certificate files in a different location.  In that case, you'll need to set the CERTIFICATE and KEY variables in your config file.  Please make sure that CERTIFICATE points to the full chain (i.e., your server cert and the intermediate CA cert combined into a single file).  With certbot, this file is called fullchain.pem; with acme.sh, it's called fullchain.cer.  For other clients, consult your documentation.

---
### Licence MIT
Copyright 2018 Konstantin Gimpel

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
